>> Ancient tools discovered
in Eastern Africa,
possibly one million years old.
What will this
discovery teach us
about our ancient human history?
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A recent gold rush
in Eastern Africa
has led to open pit mines where
gold hunters have stumbled
upon a different kind of
fortune, hundreds of stone
tools, including Acheulean
hand axes, cleavers,
and other tools.
Head of the study,
professor Miroslaw Masojc
from the Institute
of Archaeology
at the University
of Wraclaw, Poland,
says the layers of
soil around the tools
were at least 700,000 years old.
Some speculate the tools could
be up to one million years old.
This discovery puts our
ancient ancestor, Homo erectus,
in this area twice as far
back as previously thought.
Science and history
writer Andrew Collins
on the significance
of this discovery.
>> One of the important things
that we can take out of these
new discoveries is that our
forerunners, Homo erectus,
were much further east than
we'd expected in Africa.
This takes us to the
edge of that continent.
And we know that they
were in the Levant,
for instance, as early
as 70,000 years ago,
and it could well be that
we had almost a bridge that
would take us from one
continent into the other now,
and that's very
important indeed.
We now know that from
this new evidence
that the move into Asia probably
took place much earlier.
And we can see the
stepping stones
that allowed that to happen.
>> These tools were found in
modern day open pit gold mines.
Some believe many ancient
cultures used gold and minerals
for ceremonial purposes.
>> And of course,
the question becomes,
were they themselves interested
in the gold that was being
illegally mined from
these locations?
And in my opinion, the answer
would unquestionably be yes.
And this is something
which we can even
take on to the next
stage and wonder
whether these minerals,
including gold, were
used as part of
rituals to achieve
altered states of consciousness.
Well, we have to see these
forerunners of humanity
as being even more sensitive
to the magnetic fields
and the energies
of these minerals
and that it could well
have been for this reason
that the Homo
erectus people were
drawn to that area
in the first place.
>> The Acheulean hand axe is
linked to Homo erectus all over
the world.
Adding the possibility
of their interest in gold
poses another
interesting question.
>> The very first, the
very oldest example of it,
which was found on the
western shores of Lake Tacoma,
is that they have this
beautiful symmetry.
Their shape is almost like
some kind of crystalline form,
and you have to
ask yourself, what
was it that allowed our human
brains to suddenly create
things like this and
may well have introduced
the idea of a connection with
not just the unknown but also
non-human intelligences.
>> This discovery in this
specific location is a huge
find, but Andrew Collins thinks
there are bigger implications.
>> We can infer from these
discoveries is that we now have
yet another piece in the
jigsaw because, you know,
by piecing together this huge
great picture of activity,
we can tell who reached what
and at what particular date
and give us a much clearer idea
of where exactly our ancestors
reached and what they achieved.
>> Another clue, another step
closer to solving the mysteries
of our ancient past.
This is just the
latest discovery
to rewrite the history books.
Perhaps in the future we
will be open to new ideas
about how we once lived.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.